The '''natural numbers''' are the numbers 0, 1, 2, etc. The term is generally used to indicate a specific technique of representing natural numbers as either zero or the successor of some other natural number - 0, s(0), s(s(0)), etc - as in [[w:Peano arithmetic|Peano arithmetic]], a technique also sometimes referred to as '''unary numbers.'''

== Natural numbers in Twelf ==

Natural numbers in Twelf are usually defined in a similar way. Mathematically, natural numbers can be defined as zero or the successor of some other natural number:

<math>\texttt{}n ::= 0 \,|\, \texttt{s}(n)</math>

This representation translates easily into Twelf:

<twelf>
nat: type.
z: nat.
s: nat -> nat.
</twelf>

The first line declares that <tt>nat</tt> is a type. The second line declares <tt>z</tt> (zero) to be an object of type <tt>nat</tt>, and the third line declars <tt>s</tt> (successor) to be a type constructor that takes an object <tt>N</tt> of type <tt>nat</tt> and produces another object <tt>(s N)</tt> of type <tt>nat</tt>.

== Addition of natural numbers in Twelf ==

The addition of these natural numbers is defined by the judgment <math>\texttt{plus}(N_1,N_2,N_3)</math>, where <math>N_1</math>, <math>N_2</math>, and <math>N_3</math> are natural numbers. In the definition below, capital letters stand for metavariables that can range over all natural numbers. 

<math>{\qquad \over \texttt{plus}(0,N,N)}{\mbox{p-z}}</math> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; <math>{\texttt{plus}(N_1,N_2,N_3) \over \texttt{plus}(\texttt{s}(N_1),N_2,\texttt{s}(N_3))}{\mbox{p-s}}</math>

These judgments also translate cleanly into Twelf:

<twelf>
plus: nat -> nat -> nat -> type.
p-z: plus z N N.
p-s: plus (s N1) N2 (s N3)
      <- plus N1 N2 N3.
</twelf>

The first line defines the judgment, declaring <tt>plus</tt> to be a type family indexed by three terms of type <tt>nat</tt>. 

The second line declares that for any natural number <tt>N</tt>, <tt>p-z</tt> is an object of type <tt>plus z N N</tt>, which corresponds to the axiom p-z above. The <tt>N</tt> is an [[implicit parameter]] - it is treated as a bound variable by Twelf, which you can see by <twelflink check="true">looking at Twelf's output</twelflink> after checking the above code. 

The third line says that <tt>p-s</tt> is a type constructor that, given an object <tt>D</tt> of type <tt>plus N1 N2 N3</tt> (where <tt>N1</tt>, <tt>N2</tt>, and <tt>N3</tt> are all implicit parameters that can
be treated as metavariables), produces an object, <tt>p-s D</tt>, with type <tt>plus (s N1) N2 (s N3)</tt>. This corresponds to the rule p-s, which given a derivation of <math>\texttt{plus}(N_1,N_2,N_3)</math> allows us to conclude <math>\texttt{plus}(\texttt{s}(N_1),N_2,\texttt{s}(N_3))</math>.

Consider this derivation which encodes the fact that <math>2 + 1 = 3</math>:

<math> {{{\;} \over {
\texttt{plus}(0,\;\;\texttt{s}(0),\;\;\texttt{s}(0))}}{\mbox{p-z}} \over {{
\texttt{plus}(\texttt{s}(0),\;\;\texttt{s}(0),\;\;\texttt{s}(\texttt{s}(0)))} \over {
\texttt{plus}(\texttt{s}(\texttt{s}(0)),\;\;\texttt{s}(0),\;\;\texttt{s}(\texttt{s}(\texttt{s}(0))))}}{\mbox{p-s}}}{\mbox{p-s}} </math>

This can be represented in Twelf by applying the type constructor <tt>p-s</tt> to the object <tt>p-z</tt> twice:

<twelf check=decl>
2+1=3 : plus (s (s z)) (s z) (s (s (s z))) = p-s (p-s p-z).
</twelf>

== See also ==

* [[Natural numbers with inequality]]
* [[Division over the natural numbers]]
* [[Proving metatheorems with Twelf]], which uses natural numbers as an example, and also discusses the [[adequacy]] of the encoding.

== External link ==

* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_numbers Natural numbers at Wikipedia]