== Strange world declarations ==

Can anybody pinpoint the reason that Twelf requires these odd world and mode declarations? Is it a bug? &nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;[[User:Tom7|Tom 7]] 17:51, 5 October 2006 (EDT)

== Termination order backwards? ==

It seems that the documentation in the guide is the opposite of what is actually implemented. With the total declaration

<twelf>%total (A B C D) 
          (tocpsv- A _ _) 
          (tocpsv+ B _ _) 
          (tocps- _ C _ _ _) 
          (tocps+ _ D _ _ _).</twelf>

I can call <tt>tocps-</tt> from <tt>tocps+</tt> on the same derivation. The documentation says the opposite: that earlier theorems can call later ones. (See {{guide|chapter=8|section=51|title=mutual recursion}}). Am I crazy? &nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;[[User:Tom7|Tom 7]] 17:55, 5 October 2006 (EDT)

: I was under the impression it was later theorems that can call earlier ones (at least that's how I've used it in the past). --[[User:DanielKLee|DanielKLee]] 16:48, 6 October 2006 (EDT)

== Twelf output ==

The Twelf output indicates a syntax error in the example. Yay technology. --[[User:DanielKLee|DanielKLee]] 16:48, 6 October 2006 (EDT)
: Yeah, I was gonna mention that fact at some point. — [[User:rsimmons|Rob]] (and his [[User talk:rsimmons|talk]]) 17:19, 6 October 2006 (EDT)
:: We owe Tom an apology, he writes brillant code; he included type information in his code that was not part of the signature. Which is exactly what <nowiki><twelf noinclude="true"></nowiki> is for. — [[User:rsimmons|Rob]] (and his [[User talk:rsimmons|talk]]) 23:08, 6 October 2006 (EDT)
::: Word. &nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;[[User:Tom7|Tom 7]] 23:52, 8 October 2006 (EDT)
:::: You should use <tt><nowiki><twelf noinclude="true" check="decl"></nowiki></tt> to link to a [[%solve]] that establishes those derivations too, perhaps? — [[User:rsimmons|Rob]] (and his [[User talk:rsimmons|talk]]) 23:59, 8 October 2006 (EDT)
::::: I'm really just using the twelf tag here to display a term with syntax highlighting; I don't think it needs to be checked. (Actually, I think it would distract from what's actually important.) &nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;[[User:Tom7|Tom 7]] 14:41, 9 October 2006 (EDT)