== Group''s'' ==

Rob, this rocks. I have a feature request. In the article [[converting between implicit and explicit parameters]] I develop a starting signature and then discuss two diverging paths that one could use. I'd like to write

<pre><nowiki>
  <twelf groups="path1,path2">
    % starting signature
  </twelf>
 
  <twelf group="path1">
    % code for path 1
  </twelf>
 
  <twelf group="path2">
    % code for path 2
  </twelf>

  <twelflink group="path1">see path 1</twelflink>  <twelflink group="path2">see path 2</twelflink>
</nowiki></pre>

Is this possible with the current setup, or easy to add? Another useful feature which would allow me to give the impression of this is <nowiki><twelf visible="false">...</twelf></nowiki> so that I could just silently include two copies of the setup. &nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;[[User:Tom7|Tom 7]] 12:33, 9 October 2006 (EDT)

I will add the multiple groups="..." tag, and I'd been contemplating that I needed a hidden="true" tag (I like ''affirming'' the HTML). — [[User:rsimmons|Rob]] (and his [[User talk:rsimmons|talk]]) 14:00, 9 October 2006 (EDT)
* My suggestion was a little bogus: group is of course a special case of groups, so it should probably be either group="a,b,c" or allow multiple occurences of the parameter (group="a" group="b" group="c")? But, thanks! &nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;[[User:Tom7|Tom 7]] 14:34, 9 October 2006 (EDT)
:* It is done, using group="a,b,c" form. — [[User:rsimmons|Rob]] (and his [[User talk:rsimmons|talk]]) 16:30, 9 October 2006 (EDT)

== oops ==

http://twelf.plparty.org/w/index.php?title=CPS_conversion&action=edit