Welcome! — [[User:rsimmons|Rob]] (and his [[User talk:rsimmons|talk]]) 09:44, 21 February 2007 (EST)


I don't see a place where known bugs, problems are posted.  So I'll put them here.

: It might not be a bad idea to collect such things. Perhaps [[known bugs]] or [[known issues]] is a good place for this - it would be good to collect things like this and issues such as the warning about [[constraint domains and coverage checking]].

:: it would be a very good idea.  I'll let you do it.  Feel free to take any content you find useful. [[User:Boyland|Boyland]] 02:48, 15 May 2007 (EDT)

::: I've moved the contents to my user page. [[User:Boyland|Boyland]] 10:49, 22 August 2007 (EDT)

The coverage checker sometimes fails to terminate. [...]

: This is a known bug - it can occur when coverage checking is done on a lambda expression (here, the guilty party is the <tt>(expr -> expr)</tt> part of <tt>expr-in-expr : (expr -> expr) -> type</tt>, and non-termination will usually happen on theorems that are not true, like this one.

The prover sometimes fails to terminate.

: The bug here, as much as anything, is that Twelf accepcts the theorem proving (<tt>%prove</tt>) syntax at all. I don't like it either, but it is actually not difficult or even unexpected to get the theorem prover to nonterminate. — [[User:rsimmons|Rob]] (and his [[User talk:rsimmons|talk]]) 21:11, 14 May 2007 (EDT)

== Hoas/Natural Numbers ==

Thanks for the great page! Is it in a state where you're comfortable with me listing it from the front page? — [[User:rsimmons|Rob]] (and his [[User talk:rsimmons|talk]]) 16:04, 30 January 2008 (EST)

It's OK with me to post it, but best would be to fix all the %% %%% and %%%% section marks to be Wiki sections: %{ ==== }% %{ === }% and %{ == }% I think.  Perhaps you have an easy way to do this??? [[User:Boyland|Boyland]] 10:17, 7 February 2008 (EST)